=head1 INSTALLING MAILMUNGE

Mailmunge should run on any reasonably-modern UNIX or Linux system.
This document explains how to install Mailmunge from source and
configure it.


=head2 PREREQUISITES

To use Mailmunge, you need the following:

=over

=item *

A reasonably modern UNIX or Linux system.  Mailmunge development is
done on Debian GNU Linux, but Red Hat or Ubuntu are good Linux choices
as well.

=item *

Either the Sendmail or Postfix mail transfer agents.  These are the two
open-source MTAs that understand the Milter protocol used by Mailmunge.

=item *

A C development environment.

=item *

The Sendmail milter library development files.

=item *

A recent Perl installation (Perl version 5.14.0 or newer.)

=item *

The following Perl modules:

=over

L<MIME::tools|https://metacpan.org/release/MIME-tools> 5.509 or newer

L<Sys::Syslog|https://metacpan.org/pod/Sys::Syslog>

L<Sys::Hostname|https://metacpan.org/pod/Sys::Hostname>

L<Time::Local|https://metacpan.org/pod/Time::Local>

L<Encode|https://metacpan.org/pod/Encode>

L<Socket|https://metacpan.org/pod/Socket>

L<IO::Socket|https://metacpan.org/pod/IO::Socket>

L<IO::Socket::SSL|https://metacpan.org/pod/IO::Socket::SSL>

=back

For running the tests, you will also need:

=over

L<Mail::Spamassassin|https://metacpan.org/pod/Mail::SpamAssassin>

L<File::VirusScan|https://metacpan.org/pod/File::VirusScan>

L<File::Find::Rule|https://metacpan.org/pod/File::Find::Rule>

L<Test::More|https://metacpan.org/pod/Test::More>

L<Test::Deep|https://metacpan.org/pod/Test::Deep>

L<ClamAV|https://www.clamav.net/>

=back

=back

On a Debian Linux system, you can install all the prerequisites with:

  apt install libmime-tools-perl libperl-dev perl perl-modules-5.28 \
              libio-socket-ssl-perl spamassassin libfile-find-rule-perl \
              libtest-deep-perl cpanminus build-essential \
              clamav-base clamav-daemon clamav-freshclam

  cpanm -n File::VirusScan

  # Only if you plan on using Postfix...
  apt install postfix

  # Only if you plan on using Sendmail...
  apt install sendmail sendmail-bin sendmail-cf

=head2 BUILDING MAILMUNGE

Mailmunge uses the standard UNIX build invocation:

   tar xfz mailmunge-VERSION.tar.gz
   cd mailmunge-VERSION
   ./configure
   make
   make install    # This one has to be run as root (eg, with "sudo")

Run C<./configure --help> to see the available configuration options.
The C<make install> target supports the standard C<DESTDIR=/path>
variable to let you install under a separate directory hierarchy; this
is of most interest to people interested in packaging Mailmunge.

=head2 UNIT TESTS

You can run Mailmunge's unit tests as follows; the command assumes you're
currently in the top-level Mailmunge source directory.

  make test

For more verbose output:

  make test TEST_VERBOSE=-v

Don't run the unit tests as I<root>; they will fail.

=head2 REGRESSION TESTS

Mailmunge ships with a couple of Docker files for creating containers
that do regression tests.  To run the Docker regression tests, you
must (obviously) have Docker installed and your user-ID must have
permission to create and run docker images and containers.

To create a Docker container for running regression tests:

  # If you want to run tests with Postfix:
  cd docker; ./build-docker-container postfix

  # If you want to run tests with Sendmail:
  cd docker; ./build-docker-container sendmail

It can take quite a while (around 30 minutes) to create the container image.

To run the regression tests:

  # If you want to run tests with Postfix:
  cd docker; ./run-regression-tests-on-docker postfix

  # If you want to run tests with Sendmail:
  cd docker; ./run-regression-tests-on-docker sendmail

If a Mailmunge source tree already exists in the container,
C<run-regression-tests-on-docker> won't rebuild it by default.  To
force a rebuild, use:

  # If you want to run tests with Postfix:
  cd docker; ./run-regression-tests-on-docker postfix -f

  # If you want to run tests with Sendmail:
  cd docker; ./run-regression-tests-on-docker sendmail -f

In addition to C<-f>, you can use C<-v> for more verbose test
output and C<-c> for colored test output.

=head1 CONFIGURATION

=head2 POSTFIX

Postfix often runs in a I<chroot> environment, which makes using
a UNIX-domain socket to communicate with C<mailmunge> challenging.
Instead, use a TCP socket.  In the examples below,
we're assuming you chose TCP port 8872 for Milter communication,
but you can choose any available unprivileged port.

Edit your Postfix C<main.cf> file to include the following lines:

  smtpd_milters = inet:127.0.0.1:8872
  non_smtpd_milters = inet:127.0.0.1:8872
  milter_default_action = tempfail
  milter_content_timeout=900s

Again, the above lines assume that C<mailmunge> has been
configured to listen on the appropriate socket.  In this
case, the option would be C<-p inet:8872>

=head2 SENDMAIL

To configure Sendmail to use Mailmunge, edit the F<sendmail.mc> file and
add a line like this:

  INPUT_MAIL_FILTER(`mailmunge', `S=unix:/var/spool/mailmunge/mailmunge.sock, F=T, T=S:360s;R:360s;E:15m')dnl

and regenerate your F<sendmail.cf> file.  The "T=S..." sets
various timeouts for the Milter code; consult Sendmail's
reference manual for details.

The above line assumes that C<mailmunge> is listening on the socket
C</var/spool/mailmunge/mailmunge.sock>; you should use the corresponding
option C<-p /var/spool/mailmunge/mailmunge.sock> when invoking C<mailmunge>.

=head2 THE SPOOL DIRECTORY

The spool directory (typically F</var/spool/mailmunge>) is performance-critical
and does not hold any persistent data.  As such, it can (and should) be mounted
on a RAM disk.  On Linux, you can put this in F</etc/fstab> to put
F</var/spool/mailmunge> on a RAM disk:

 tmpfs /var/spool/mailmunge tmpfs nosuid,nodev,uid=mailmunge,gid=mailmunge,mode=0750

Note that the C<uid=> and C<gid=> parameters assume that you are running
Mailmunge as the user C<mailmunge> (which is the default.)  Adjust as
appropriate if you run Mailmunge as some other user.

=head2 INIT SCRIPTS

Mailmunge ships with both a SYSV-init style init script in
F<sysvinit/mailmunge> and systemd units in
F<systemd-units/mailmunge.service> and
F<systemd-units/mailmunge-multiplexor.service>

Both the sysvinit script and the systemd units read a file called
C</etc/default/mailmunge> for environment variable settings.
The following tables show how the environemt variable settings map
to C<mailmunge> and C<mailmunge-multiplexor> options.

In the tables below, add the setting in the right-hand
column to C</etc/default/mailmunge> to enable the option
in the left-hand column.  The word "yes" is literal;
other words like "num" or "facility" depend on the
specific option they affect.

=head3 The sysvinit script

Assuming you have installed the C<sysvinit/mailmunge> script in
C</etc/init.d/>, use the following to control Mailmunge:

  /etc/init.d/mailmunge start    # Start mailmunge and mailmunge multiplexor
  /etc/init.d/mailmunge stop     # Stop mailmunge and mailmunge multiplexor
  /etc/init.d/mailmunge restart  # Stop and then start mailmunge and mailmunge multiplexor
  /etc/init.d/mailmunge status   # Show status of mailmunge and mailmunge-multiplexor
  /etc/init.d/mailmunge reload   # Tell mailmunge-multiplexor to reload filter rules
  /etc/init.d/mailmunge reread   # Synonym for reload

=head2 The systemd units

Note that you should only invoke the C<mailmunge> unit; it takes care
of also invoking C<mailmunge-multiplexor> for you.

  systemctl start mailmunge   # Start mailmunge and mailmunge multiplexor
  systemctl stop mailmunge    # Start mailmunge and mailmunge multiplexor
  systemctl restart mailmunge # Stop and then start mailmunge and mailmunge multiplexor
  systemctl reload mailmunge  # Tell mailmunge-multiplexor to reload filter rules
  systemctl status mailmunge  # Show status of mailmunge service

=head3 Variables that affect L<mailmunge> options:

 mailmunge option           /etc/default/mailmunge setting

  -C                        MM_CONSERVE_DESCRIPTORS=yes
  -G                        MM_ALLOW_GROUP_ACCESS=yes
  -H                        MX_HELO_CHECK=yes
  -N                        MM_SUPPRESS_REJECTED_RCPTS=yes
  -P pidfile                MM_PIDFILE=pidfile
  -R num                    MM_RESERVED_FOR_LOOPBACK=num
  -S facility               SYSLOG_FACILITY=facility
  -T                        LOG_FILTER_TIME=yes
  -U username               MX_USER=username
  -X                        SUPPRESS_SCANNED_BY=yes
  -b backlog                MM_LISTEN_BACKLOG=backlog
  -c                        STRIP_BARE_CR=yes
  -k                        KEEP_FAILED_DIRECTORIES=yes
  -m mx_socket              MX_SOCKET=mx_socket (UNIX socket path)
  -p socket                 SOCKET=socket (UNIX socket path or inet:port)
  -q                        ALLOW_CONNECTIONS_TO_QUEUE=yes
  -r                        MX_RELAY_CHECK=yes
  -s                        MX_SENDER_CHECK=yes
  -t                        MX_RECIPIENT_CHECK=yes
  -x string                 SCANNED_BY=string
  -y                        USE_SMFI_SETSYMLIST=yes
  -z spooldir               SPOOLDIR=spooldir
  (extra options)           MM_EXTRA="-a foo -a bar"  # Any extra options

=head3 Variables that affect L<mailmunge-multiplexor> options:

 mailmunge-multiplexor      /etc/default/mailmunge setting
      option
  -E                        MX_EMBED_PERL=yes
  -G                        MM_ALLOW_GROUP_ACCESS=yes
  -I backlog                MX_LISTEN_BACKLOG=backlog
  -L secs                   MX_LOG_WORKER_STATUS_INTERVAL=secs
  -M limit                  MX_MAX_AS=limit
  -N socket                 MX_MAP_SOCKET=socket
  -O notify_socket          MX_NOTIFIER=notify_socket
  -P num                    MX_PARALLEL_TICKS=num
  -Q timeout                MX_QUEUE_TIMEOUT=timeout
  -R limit                  MX_MAX_RSS=limit
  -S facility               SYSLOG_FACILITY=facility
  -T                        MX_STATS_SYSLOG=yes
  -U username               MX_USER=username
  -V lifetime               MX_MAX_LIFETIME=lifetime
  -W secs                   MX_MIN_WORKER_DELAY=secs
  -X secs                   MX_TICK_INTERVAL=secs
  -Y label                  MX_SYSLOG_LABEL=label
  -Z                        MX_STATUS_UPDATES=yes
  -a socket                 MX_UNPRIV_SOCKET=socket
  -b timeout                MX_BUSY=timeout
  -c timeout                MX_CMD_TIMEOUT=timeout
  -f path_to_filter         FILTER=path_to_filter
  -i timeout                MX_IDLE=timeout
  -l                        MX_LOG=yes
  -m num                    MX_MINIMUM=num
  -p pidfile                MX_PIDFILE=pidfile
  -q size                   MX_QUEUE_SIZE=size
  -r num                    MX_REQUESTS=num
  -s socket                 MX_SOCKET=socket
  -w secs                   MX_WORKER_DELAY=secs
  -x num                    MX_MAXIMUM=num
  -y num                    MX_RECIPOK_PERDOMAIN=num
  -z path_to_spooldir       SPOOLDIR=path_to_spooldir

=head3 Defaults

The init scripts use the following defaults for
environment variable settings (which may be overridden
in F</etc/default/mailmunge>

  MX_USER=mailmunge                              # Or whatever ./configure picked
  MX_GROUP=mailmunge                             # Or whatever ./configure picked
  SPOOLDIR=/var/spool/mailmunge                  # Or whatever ./configure picked
  MX_PIDFILE=/var/run/mailmunge-multiplexor.pid
  MM_PIDFILE=/var/run/mailmunge.pid
  MM_ALLOW_GROUP_ACCESS=yes
  MX_BUSY=600
  MX_LOG=yes
  MX_MINIMUM=2
  MX_MAXIMUM=10
  USE_SMFI_SETSYMLIST=yes
  MX_SOCKET=$SPOOLDIR/mailmunge-multiplexor.sock
  SOCKET=$SPOOLDIR/mailmunge.sock

