=head1 NAME

watch-multiple-mailmunges.tcl - Keep an eye on a cluster of Mailmunge machines

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 watch-multiple-mailmunges.tcl [-n] [-r] [-s] [-t] [-archive] machine-1 machine-2 ... machine-N

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<watch-multiple-mailmunges.tcl> is a Tk script that graphically
displays the status of L<mailmunge-multiplexor> on a cluster of
machines.  Note that Tcl/Tk 8.4 or higher is required to run
C<watch-multiple-mailmunges.tcl>.

If you supply the C<-archive> command-line option, then
C<watch-multiple-mailmunges.tcl> logs the output of
C<mm-mx-ctrl rawload> for each machine.  The output for I<machine_name> is logged in:

F<$HOME/.watch-multiple-mailmunges/I<machine_name>/data>

If you supply any of C<-n>, C<-r>, C<-s> or C<-t>
options, then C<watch-multiple-mailmunges.tcl> uses the
C<rawload1> command rather than C<rawload> command to read
performance data.

The C<-n>, C<-r>, C<-s>, and C<-t> options enable
monitoring of scan times, filter_relay times, filter_sender times
and filter_recipient times, respectively.

=head1 PREREQUISITES

To use C<watch-multiple-mailmunges.tcl> to monitor a cluster of machines,
you must have the following prerequisites:

=over

=item *

A UNIX-like machine with Tcl/Tk 8.4, the X window system and an SSH client.
You also need "xterm" to use some of the features.

=item *

The ability to SSH I<as root> to all of the machines you want to monitor.
Ideally, you should be using the SSH agent so that you can SSH to the
monitored machines as root without being prompted for a password or
pass phrase.

=item *

The program C<mm-mx-ctrl> on root's path on all the machines you want
to monitor.

=back

=head1 DISPLAY

For each machine specified on the command line,
C<watch-multiple-mailmunges.tcl> creates a chart with five columns.
The columns are:

=over

=item 1

A button with the name of the machine.  Clicking the button pops up
a menu that lets you take various actions, as described later.  If all workers
on the machine are busy, the button turns yellow.

=item 2

A label showing the number of busy workers in the form "busy/total", where
total is the total number of workers.

=item 3

A label showing the average number of messages per second over the last
10 seconds.

=item 4

A label showing the average number of milliseconds per scan over the
last 10 seconds.

=item 5

A chart that graphs the average number of busy workers, the average
number of messages per second and the average scan time in milliseconds,
all averaged over the last 10 seconds.

=back

=head1 MACHINE MENU

If you click on a machine name, a menu with three options pops up:

=over

=item SSH

Open an xterm session and ssh as root to the machine.

=item Busy Workers

Monitor the busy workers on the machine.  If you click on the
process-ID of a worker, an xterm will open up and the command
C<strace -s 100 -t -p pid> will be executed on the remote machine.  This is
Linux-specific, but you can edit C<watch-multiple-mailmunges.tcl> to
replace the command with your particular system's command for tracing
system calls.

=item Delete

Remove the machine from the list of machines being monitored.

=back

=head1 ADDING A MACHINE

If you need to add a machine to the display, simply type the name of the
machine in the "Add Machine:" box and press Enter.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<mailmunge>, L<mailmunge-protocol>, L<mm-mx-ctrl>

=head1 AUTHOR

C<watch-multiple-mailmunges.tcl> was written by Dianne Skoll.

=head1 LICENSE

This code is licened under the terms of the GNU General Public License,
version 2.
